---
title: "[419] Too sad for words"
summary: ""
description: ""

date: 2015-09-02
draft: false
---

Reader response to the last two columns on Josephine Bracken is an indication that people are curious about what happened to her after Rizal’s death. She did go to Cavite, then the hotbed of the revolution, where she played Florence Nightingale by caring for the sick and wounded. She claimed to have taken rifle and horse to charge at the enemy then killing a Spanish officer to become a modern-day Joan of Arc.

After her return to Hong Kong, Josephine faded into the obscurity where she came from; whatever light she had was reflected from her relationship with Rizal. Josephine died on March 15, 1902, in a bad part of town and was buried in a pauper’s grave in Happy Valley cemetery. Her death certificate listed the cause of death as “miliary tuberculosis and ulceration of the breast.”

What most people do not know is that this woman, described by Rizal as his “poor and unhappy wife,” laid claim to part of Rizal’s estate and brought Teodora Alonso to court to force the family to produce what she claimed was Rizal’s last will and testament. In her desperate attempt to force the hand of the Rizal family, she wrote a series of letters to Ferdinand Blumentritt.

One dated Nov. 9, 1897 reads as follows:

“My most appreciated [sic] and respectful friend. You must excuse me for the delay in answering your kind letter, because I have been very ill. But you must imagine dear friend what a joy it was for me to receive your ever welcomed letter dated the 7th July. I thought that you can cared not to answer my letters, but I see, that it was a letter that touched my heart and brought tears in my eyes. Before going any further in my letter I think it is my duty to inquire first how are your kind family [sic] getting on. Hoping they are enjoying good health. By receiving letters from you it reminds me the time that I was staying in Dapitan, because whenever he received any letter from you he will always tell me that he received an appreciated [sic] letter from his friend, a friend that he adored so much. Yes time has changed he is now 11 months under his solemn [sic] grave.

“Well I must bid you good dear friend because the mail closes at 10 a.m. With fondest love to Mrs. Blumentritt [and] Children.

“I remain Your Sincerely [sic] Josephine Rizal.”

In transcribing the originals of the letters preserved in the National Library of the Philippines, I left Josephine’s letters as is to expose her atrocious grammar and spelling. In another letter dated Nov. 29, 1897, she requested Blumentritt to provide her with a letter to Jose Ma. Basa so she can claim Rizal’s library that was under his safekeeping, then she would send these to Blumentritt in Litomerice. It is obvious that she, or whoever encouraged her to get the library, would have sold every title when they got hold of them. Aside from Rizal’s Library that was valued at 3,000 pesos, Josephine laid claim to: 1,000 pesos in cash, and all the paintings by Juan Luna that then as well as now were much coveted. The Nov. 29 letter reads:

“Respectable Friend: I let you know by these few lines that my late husband Dr. Jose Rizal left all his books to you. There are three bookcases I mean library [sic] in care of Mr. Jose Maria Basa’s house I opened the Will last month and found that the bookcases were for you, he very often told me that those books cost him 3000$. I asked Mr. Basa for the books and he denied them, I think it is better for you to write over and ask him for the things that my husband left for you.

“Yes; dear friend the Philippines [Filipinos] out here now they are not Gentlemen, they deceived me a great deal their [sic] were 1000$ given to Rizal by the Freemason Lodge so it was to be given to me, but they took it and spent it all. I think it is the best thing for you to me a letter to hand the bookcases to me and I will sent [sic] it over to you, because Mr. Basa is selling all the best books. I have lots of troubles with the Philippines they are not what I thought them to be, I took them to be like my husband, but I see that I am deceived.

“Hoping that all your family [sic] are enjoying good health and please excuse my letter if it is badly written because I am with a strong favour [sic].

“With my warmest affection and respects to yourself and family.

“I remain. Your sincerest friend Josephine Rizal.

“My address Mrs. Josephine Rizal C/o Mr. J. Goodchild Thomas Grill Room Hongkong.”

Basa’s reply to Josephine and her lawyers when they demanded the turnover of Rizal’s books was that she had to give him proof of her marriage to Rizal. A marriage certificate issued by Church authorities in Manila, or even a certification from the British Consul in Manila, would have been sufficient. Josephine was not able to produce the document and failed to claim Rizal’s library.

In 1902 Paciano Rizal, retired general of the Philippine Revolution and elder brother of Jose Rizal, broke a 15-year silence and replied to an inquiry by Blumentritt by stating that Rizal died, intestate, that he had no knowledge of a will left by Rizal and advised him to ignore Josephine Bracken. Nothing came of the lawsuit and whatever remaining goodwill she maintained with Rizal’s family was squandered away. Josephine Bracken’s story is something I had hoped to write someday but I have kept my notes because it is a story too sad for words.
