---
title: "[567] History, Cherry blossoms, and the Kudan"
summary: ""
description: ""

date: 2017-03-31
draft: false
---

During the cherry blossom season in Tokyo, tourists and locals alike visit a part of the Imperial Palace complex that has Instagram-worthy views of the blooms on the moat. Quite close to this important sakura viewing spot is the residence of the Philippine ambassador to Japan, the main gate and sprawling garden of which have blooming cherry trees. Since the mansion—nicknamed “Kudan”—remains among a handful of original prewar structures in an area teeming with modern multistory structures, it should be preserved, if not under Japanese heritage rules, then by Philippine heritage rules.

In March 2014 a bronze plaque was unveiled at the entrance of the mansion by then Ambassador Manuel M. Lopez and then National Historical Commission of the Philippines (NHCP) Chair Maria Serena Diokno formalizing its declaration as a National Historical Landmark. It is the first and only such declared landmark outside the Philippines today. By virtue of its being listed as a National Historical Landmark in the registry of Philippine historic structures, no renovation or alteration can be implemented on the Kudan without consultation and the written consent of the NHCP chair in Manila. By this it is understood that the property cannot be sold or redeveloped without the NHCP’s approval.

While the Kudan survived the fire bombing of Tokyo in 1945 as well as the postwar urban redevelopment of Japan, it was almost sold in 2010 and marked for the wrecking ball to give way to a high-rise apartment building. Fortunately, by bringing the matter to the public and through successful lobbying, the Philippine Ambassadors Foundation secured its status as national patrimony, thereby ensuring its present and future existence and conservation. We hope the incoming ambassador, Jose Laurel, will oppose any new moves to sell or redevelop what is historically the first Philippine embassy ever established by our Foreign Office.

The present building was completed in 1935, on a site whose previous owners can be traced on maps all the way back to the 17th century. Future research will ascertain the name and nationality of the architect of the Yasuda mansion. At present there are three versions: 1) Yoko Ono remembered that the architect was a Frenchman; 2) Leon Ma. Guerrero, who worked in the mansion when it was the Philippine embassy in 1944-1945, said the architect was German; and 3) architecture historian and professor Uchida, after undertaking recent research, named the architect as Tokisuke Yokokawa of the Yokokawa Construction Co.

Before it became the residence of the Philippine ambassador to Japan, the Kudan served as both chancery and residence at the close of World War II. It is historically significant that the Kudan was the first Philippine embassy and residence established outside the Philippines. Jorge B. Vargas was the first Philippine ambassador to Japan who carried Diplomatic Passport No. 1, the first ever issued in Filipino instead of English.

Telegrams were sent to the foreign ministers of 24 countries informing them of the proclamation of Philippine Independence and the inauguration of the second Philippine republic. Only nine countries replied to recognize the Republic of the Philippines: Japan, Manchukuo, China, Croatia, Burma, Thailand, Italy, Germany and Slovakia. Three countries—Bulgaria, Hungary and Spain—sent messages of congratulations but were silent on recognition. The Vatican was the most diplomatic of all: Its telegram simply noted the contents of the message from Manila.

During the war the Philippines maintained only one embassy in Tokyo, and the entire foreign service was composed of six persons: Ambassador Vargas and a handful of staff members, namely: Francisco Lavides, counselor; Faustino Sy-changco and Leon Ma. Guerrero, both carrying the rank of second secretary; Jose Carmona, third secretary and finance officer; and last but not least, Kazuma Nakayama, interpreter.

In another significant corner on the mansion grounds are cherry trees that were planted after the war to commemorate Elpidio Quirino’s pardon of Japanese prisoners of war, who were released from the national penitentiary in Muntinlupa and repatriated. It would be a pity if the Kudan and all its history cannot be maintained.
