---
title: "[883] Marcos’ stem cell treatment, May 1971"
summary: ""
description: ""

date: 2020-08-26
draft: false
---


While waiting for a vaccine for COVID-19, we have heard some suggestions for treatments, from semen as a cure to using diesel to sanitize masks and hands. As a martial law baby, I recall hearing similar things, from Tony Agpaoa who made faith healing a sunshine tourism industry, to comfrey, kargasok, and pito-pito tea. Adults shared recipes for homemade brews such as kampupot, pancit-pancitan, and tawa-tawa. Dr. Almanzor had Key-cell capsules. Johnny Midnight charged water beside radios at dawn through “Toning.”The road to wellness and longevity is paved with gold and good intentions. Paul Niehans (1882-1971) cashed in on this big time. The Swiss surgeon who pioneered cell therapy and anti-aging immunotherapy attracted a jet-set clientele, with endorsements from Pope Pius XII, Konrad Adenauer, and Charlie Chaplin. Niehans injected patients with cells freshly harvested from sheep, which would supposedly rejuvenate old cells and regenerate dead ones. Cell therapy was touted to cure everything from cancer to homosexuality.

A Frankfurt stem cell clinic features some Filipino endorsers: Pilita Corrales (for pain management), and Ricky Reyes, Joseph Estrada, and Imelda Marcos (for anti-aging). Mrs. Marcos, along with her husband Ferdinand, received stem cell shots in Malacañang in May 1971. President Marcos recorded it in his diary on May 17, 1971:

“I did not write anything [in my journal] as I was in bed from the injections given by Dr. W. Michel of the Neehans [Niehans] Clinic in Geneva, Switzerland. I attach the brochure on cellular therapy.

“The [freshly harvested sheep] cells were brought here packed in dry ice and in special containers, frozen. Then in the morning at 11:00 AM, the doctor assisted by his daughter, a nurse (Laura Michel), defroze the cells with the most meticulous attention to prevent the breakage of the cells or escape from the fluid in which they were mixed… At 12:15 PM, I was told to prepare at our bedroom.

“I was injected at 12:50 PM and Imelda at 1:10 PM. The needles used on me were size 15. They looked like needles used by veterinarians for horses—about six inches long. And the fluid was variable—5 or 10 cc depending on the cells. I had 12 injections on the right buttock as I could rest on the left one to sleep. Imelda had 10 on the left buttock. And we were ordered to stay prone on our stomachs for fifteen minutes to allow the cells a chance to circulate. I stayed in that position up to 1:30 PM to keep Imelda company. [Roberto] Bobby Benedicto also had his injections… The injections were not as painful as a bullet wound but paralyzed my leg muscles for a while.

“We all laughed when, after my silent immobile and stoical reception of the injections, Dr. Michel commented of me: ‘Good character.’ In the afternoon, I started to develop rashes or hives in the back and the upper arms. They treated me with an ointment Synopen. They disappeared the following day. Slept after the injections as we are supposed to be in bed 3 to 4 days. Lunch at about 2:00 PM. Slept again up to 6:00 PM. Then dinner at 8:00 PM. Slept late (about 12:00 PM). Saw a television movie in bed before that.

“May 18, 1971. Had a slight fever from 36.6 to 37.2 highering [sic] of the blood pressure from 120/80 in the morning to 128/88 in the late afternoon. And increase in pulse rate from 60 to 70-72 per minute. Pain in the lumbar region when I woke up… Dr. Michel says the pain in the lumbar region is a result of the continued immobility in bed and has prescribed rolling up the body into a ball like a fetus in the mother’s womb to stretch the back muscles. This seems to work. The other symptoms, he says are normal.

“He has banned all toxic medicines including aspirin. No eggs, no pork, no coffee, chocolate or oily and spicy foods. No alcohol. No sex for four days after the injection. I was surprised at the sense of humor of the doctor. I asked him point-blank when Imelda and I ‘could have contact’ for our project of a baby… With a straight face, he told everybody, ‘Now everybody get out, so they can start their project!’ And he meant it. He said we could start right away. Although later he said it would be best if we waited four days from the injections. He said the full effect of the injections will be felt in three to four months.”

Marcos was not seen in public on May 17-19, but the Official Gazette dutifully reported that he was deep in desk work, even if he was in fact immobilized by his secret stem cell treatment. A president’s health can drive the stock market down or inspire speculations about succession; no wonder it’s often kept confidential.
