---
title: "[1032] Fun with party list names"
summary: ""
description: ""

date: 2022-02-02
draft: false
---

Carefully crafted party list names provide light moments in Philippine politics. These will be in full display in May in a lengthy ballot that will remind voters of True or False examinations they endured in basic education. One hundred and seventy-three party list groups officially accepted by the Commission on Elections (Comelec) for inclusion in the printed ballot is quite a lot. Deleting seven facing Supreme Court temporary restraining orders won’t make a dent. In the last election, party list groups were arranged alphabetically on the ballot; this year, the order will be jumbled, frustrating those that played the old system by registering under “A” as follows:

ABANG LINGKOD; ABANTE PILIPINAS (Avid Builders of Active Nation’s citizenry Towards Empowered Philippines); ABP (Ang Bumbero ng Pilipinas); ACT (Alliance of Concerned Teachers); AKKK (Ang Kabuhayang Kayang Kaya); ABS (Arts Business and Science Professionals); ANAKALUSUGAN (Alagaan Natin ang Ating Kalusugan) could simply be ANAK but someone must have beat them to the name. AKO I.P. (Ang Koalisyon ng Indigenous People) grammatically and to use the active tense should drop “ang” and just be Koalisyon ng Indigenous People or KIP but that brings them down from “A” to “K.” There is a group registered as L.O.G.R.O. KUSINERO that used AANGAT KUSINERONG PINOY in the ballot. Double “A” would have put them at the top of the list but not anymore.

Many are based on ethno-lingustic origin: AAMBIS-OWA (Ang Asosayon sang Mangunguma nga Bisaya—OWA Mangunguma, Inc.); API (Abante Pangasinan-Ilokano party); ABEKA or Abe (friend) Kapampangan; AKO BICOL (Ako Bicol Political Party); AKO BISAYA (Ako Bisaya Partylist); AKO BISDAK (Ako Bisdak-Bisayang Dako, Inc.); AIA (Ako Ilocano Ako); ALSA BISAYA; AMIN (Anak Mindanao partylist); AN Waray party list; AYUDA SANDUGO (Mindoro Sandugo Para sa Kaunlaran, Inc.); BICOL SARO; BG party-list (Bisaya Gyud party-list); KB (Kusog Bikolandia); MORO AKO-OK PARTYLIST; PROBINSYANO AKO; SUBANEN (Subanen party-list); UMA ILONGGO (Ugyon Mangunguma, Mangingisda kag Mamumugon nga Ilonggo); and USWAG ILONGGO (Uswag Ilonggo Party).

Gabriela may be the most vocal and well-known Philippine women’s organization. In an alphabetical listing Gabriela will rank lower than ANG KOMADRONA and BABAE AKO (Babae Ako para sa Bayan). Disinformation peddler Mocha Uson of MOCHA MOthers for CHAnge makes a second bid for Congress after failing under AA-Kasosyo in 2019. While some names are very clear about the marginalized sector they represent like KONTRA BROWNOUT (National Association of Electricity Consumers for Reforms, Inc.) or AKO MUSIKERO (Ako Musikero Association, Inc.) or UNITED FRONTLINERS (United Frontliners of the Philippines), what do we make of AGIMAT (Agimat ng Masa)? TUTOK TO WIN? Or MARVELOUS TAYO (Noble advancement of marvelous people of the Philippines, Inc.)?

Some build on familiar acronyms like BPO (Bangon Philippine Outsourcing) and PTA (Parents Teachers Alliance). Others appropriate: BTS is not the Korean singing group but Bayaning TSuper; PBA is not the Philippine Basketball Association but Puwersa ng Bayaning Atleta; TODA is not a Tricycle Operators and Drivers Association but TOwards Development and Action party list. ALONA references a Bohol white sand beach that got its name from 1960s sexy star Alona Alegre. Her name was appropriated by Alliance of Organizations Networks and Associations of the Philippines that should be ALONAP.

LPGMA (Liquefied Petroleum Gas Marketers Association, Inc.) packs a punch adding GMA, a TV network, Gen. Mariano Alvarez (both revolutionary hero and the Cavite town named after him), and Gloria Macapagal Arroyo. PLM is not Pamantasan ng Lungsod ng Maynila but Partido Lakas ng Masa. STL is not Small Town Lottery but Samahan ng Totoong Larong may Puso Foundation. TGP is not The Generics Pharmacy but Talino at Galing ng Pinoy.

CLICK PARTY (Computer Literacy, Innovation Connectivity and Knowledge, Inc.). H.E.L.P. PILIPINAS (Health, Education, Livelihood Program of the Philippines). HOME OWNER (Home Owners and Marginalized Empowerment through Opportunities With Neighborhood Economic Reliability). PEACE (Philippine Educators Alliance for Community Empowerment). S.M.I.L.E. (Samahan ng Manggagawa sa Industiya ng Live Events). KAPUSO-PM (KAbalikat Patungo sa Umuunlad na Sistematiko at Organisadong Pangkabuhayan Movement).

Party list names provide hours and hours of fun.
