---
title: "[1077] ‘Tsismis,’ ‘chismis,’ ‘alimúom,’ gossip"
summary: ""
description: ""

date: 2022-07-13
draft: false
---

Being in the eye of a storm for simply declaring that there is a difference between “chismis” and gossip, led to some reflections on the origin of the word “tsismis.” While drafting this column, I received a message from National Artist Virgilio S. Almario whose thoughts on the subject are way clearer than mine. I yield my space to him and apologize in advance for mistakes in translating his text from the original Filipino. He begins by saying that what we know as chismis today:

“… was born in the past as Alimúom (not fog) but like the vapor that evaporates from the dry surface of the earth when watered by light rain. This vapor spreads without anyone knowing where it came from, like tsismis, it causes gas (kabag) when caught. The big difference between tsismis and alimúom, is that the former is more damaging to the reputation or name of the person in question.

“Gossip flies even without wings, like any news. But unlike the news, no author can be identified nor introduced. So it is just caught like alimúom. But some news received other names in the press: street news became balitang kalye. Palengkera defined the market vendor adept at spreading alimúom. Kuwentong barbero were stories sourced from the barber shop, or kuwentong kutsero were stories that kalesa commuters from getting bored during their ride.

“It is possible that much can be true of the fog or alimúom of the past. It forms part of popular legend and folklore in remote villages and even in populated populations.”

Everything changed when alimúom was christened as “chismes” in Spanish-speaking high society and blue-bloods. Inevitably, some things must be kept secret inside their bahay na bato, especially secrets that cannot be confessed to the parish priest or the secret he created. Nevertheless, servants overheard it, murmured, and chismes wandered off into the ears of the neighbors.

“La Solidaridad has no record of when tsismis was first uttered and written in lieu of the Spanish chismes. This was not on Rizal’s agenda to reform Tagalog orthography. Pascual Poblete did not publish who made up the CH in, charol, cheque, chico, chocolate, chorizo, and chucherias later pronounced in Tagalog, and transposed with TS: tsapa, tsarol, tseke, tsiko, tsokolate, tsuper, tsuriso, at tsutsuriyas. But this was the beginning of the naturalization of chismes to become tsismis that became part of the Indio people, and later a permanent part of the country of Bonifacio, Quezon, and Recto.

“Then American conquest came. Badge, leather shoes, check, boy, driver, hotdog, and trinkets were words that came into fashion. But tsismisan sold more quickly on tabloid and society pages. A clear norm of gossip is that it works well when the subject is well-known in high society, politics, or business. The tsismosa it charged with libel and prosecuted, but earns fame (or notoriety) when haled to court … When tsikahan became common in the world of showbiz we had Inday Badiday and Kuya Germs who were ‘official’ gossips for their wards, promoting them for the movie box office. (Tsismis is also my source. He-he!)

“The Chichay, Chiquito, Pugo and Togo, Pepot, Pepay who became caricatures of tsismosas and tsismosos built careers in radio, TV, and film making fun of all the shortcomings in our society. And yet it is clear, many of the supposed rumors are believed to be true when the subjects are the affluent and powerful in society. More so when human rights are restricted.

“During the martial law years, there was a ban on rumor-mongering, new English word for tsismis. Nevertheless, rumors of military abuses and corruption by sitting government officials spread. Tsismis became a weapon in the defense of democracy when democratic space was closed and only government propaganda appeared in newspapers and on the air.

“Those in power also spread tsismis, but this is deployed against the oppressed, the poor, the weak but valiant villain, tsismis is true tsismis. Lies and slander should not be believed. Thus, it takes an army of paid trolls, artistang palengkera, and bald academics to release steam and damage the brains of the 31M who can absorb their poisonous fog or alimúom.”
