---
title: "[1141] 1986, the end of the first Marcos era"
summary: ""
description: ""

date: 2023-03-03
draft: false
---

Seven was the lucky number of Ferdinand E. Marcos. With a view to history, Marcos scheduled important decisions or actions on calendar dates that had a seven or multiples of seven. The martial law declaration was signed on Sept. 17, 1972, but postdated to Sept. 21, 1972. Martial law was officially proclaimed by him, on nationwide TV and radio, at a little past 7 p.m. on Sept. 23. It was the seventh year of his administration that ended when he left Malacañang in Feb. 25, 1986. It was the 21st year of his administration.

From the seven US state department situation reports for Feb. 25, 1986, we have a view of Marcos’ last day. Established primary sources on the period do not match the fanciful recreation of the past in the 2022 film “Maid in Malacañang.” One of the things I remember from Feb. 24, 1986, was jumping at the news that Marcos had finally left Malacañang, only to be disappointed when he appeared on TV on Feb. 25, 1986, saying he was not stepping down. Later in the morning, Corazon Aquino was inaugurated as president of the Philippines in Club Filipino in San Juan. Marcos also held his inauguration at Malacañang, but the television feed of the ceremony was interrupted, so the public did not see the last view of the family on the balcony of Malacañang, with Mrs. Marcos crooning “Dahil sa iyo” as their swan song. We did not know then that Marcos would abandon the palace later.

One US Embassy situation report from Feb. 25 read the writing on the wall as of 10:30 a.m. (Eastern Standard Time):

“The Marcos era is coming to an end. Although, it is not yet certain whether the departure will occur peacefully or only after violence and loss of life. Defections within the Armed Forces have snowballed to the point that Marcos has control over a rapidly dwindling military base of questionable morale. Elite security units loyal to Ver may still fight it out, but the final result is no longer in doubt.

“Manila is generally calm as the day begins, although unconfirmed reports of scattered incidents of violence are coming in, including one of fighting outside the Makati Mayor’s office between military men and men in civilian clothes. Nine bodies were reported seen. The column of APC’s that left Malacañang in the early hours toward Channel 4 returned to Malacañang after getting within sight of the huge crows estimated in the neighborhood of 500,000 keeping vigil there all night.

“People Power the watchword here, dodged the armored column the whole way. Private citizens with CB [radio]’s followed the APC’s in cars reporting their progress. In the end, the size and determination of the crowd was enough, as it proved to be since the crisis began on Saturday, and the column simply turned around without making a serious effort to penetrate.

“The defections within the AFP officer corps have undoubtedly affected General Ver’s staff capability. The absence of an effort to mount any serious counterattack during the night of Feb. 24-25 on installations held by the Enrile-Ramos forces reflects the unraveling of Ver’s command and control. As if to underline this point: The Enrile-Ramos forces have now announced that ASP Operations Officer (J-3) and Commander of the Scout Ranger Regiment Brig. Gen. Felix Brawner has defected to them.”

Further in the report: “Malacañang and the surrounding area continue to appear calm and quiet. Handfuls of troops are still manning barbed-wire barricades at all roads leading to the Palace. At Mendiola bridge, a few hundred demonstrators are in front of the barricades, while the soldiers, who number only a few dozen, are almost out of sight. At Nagtahan bridge, approximately 200 Army troops in riot gear and another 100 in combat gear are facing a crowd of about 300 peaceful demonstrators.

“At the Palace itself, guards are allowing a few hundred, pro-Marcos demonstrators into the Palace ground[s]. Apparently to participate in the “inaugural” scheduled for noon on the 25th. Security forces are allowing only those with invitations on a master list to enter.”

Reports later confirmed that Marcos and a huge party left Malacañang for Clark Airbase, and from there, onward to Guam, with no final destination yet. With the sear of power vacant, the US then recognized Corazon Aquino as president of the Philippines through a White House statement. History gives us the forest or outcome of events, primary sources provide the details or trees left out of the narrative.
